az1615 Reviewed March 2020
Planting and Harvesting Calendar for
Gardeners in Yuma County
Stacey R. Bealmear and Kurt D. Nolte Reviewed by Robert Masson and Janine Lane
PATRICIA KENYON
Yuma is known as the Winter Salad Bowl of the nation,
producing over 90% of the winter leafy greens and
vegetables consumed in the United States. Between the
months of November and March, Yuma is the epicenter of
US production of salad greens. This is great news for home
gardeners! When gardeners in northern climates begin
storing their gardening tools for the winter gardeners in
Yuma are just getting started.
There are two distinct growing seasons in Yuma. The first
growing season extends from September through February,
when the sun is low and the days are short, and is ideal for
growing cool season crops. The second growing season
extends from March throughAugust, when the sun is higher
in the sky and days are longer, and is ideal for growing
warm season crops. The cool season is best for growing non-
fruiting plants such as lettuce, spinach, broccoli, cauliflower,
and cabbage. These crops thrive in cool weather and can
survive the occasional light frost that occurs in Yuma. The
warm season is the best time to grow fruiting crops such as
tomatoes, squash, melons, and peppers, which can handle
the warmer spring temperatures.
In addition to plant selection and timing of planting,
successful gardening in Yuma also requires planning and
preparation to effectively manage soil pH, salinity, and
pests. Yuma soil can be a challenge for gardeners due to its
alkalinity and salinity. In most parts of the United States, soil
acidity is common and amending garden beds with lime to
raise pH is routine. For this reason, new residents moving
to Yuma from northern regions might instinctively want to
apply lime when preparing garden beds. However, Yuma's
soil is naturally very high in pH and typically has pH values
of 8 or 9. Since most plants absorb the optimal amount of
nutrients and grow best in soils at pH 7, adding lime to the
soil is normally not advisable. Soil tests should be used to
determine your soil's pH before any soil amendments are
added.
If soil pH is found to be high, this can be remedied by
amending the soil with sulfur. Application of granular
sulfur compounds lowers soil pH, as it produces sulfuric
acid in the presence of water, which then acidifies the soil. If
ammonium sulfate is used not only will soil pH be reduced
but nitrogen levels will be increased as well.
2 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension
Another challenge for Yuma gardens is high soil salinity.
The water we use to irrigate our gardens can be saline. When
irrigation water evaporates or is taken up by plants it leaves
salts behind. Accumulations of salts in the soil can lead to
plant decline and even death. Drip irrigation systems cause
the greatest accumulation of salts because the small amount
of water supplied during each irrigation event concentrates
salts in the soil where plant roots grow. For this reason, the
best way to reduce this build up is to wash the salts out of
the root zone by adding calcium from gypsum followed by a
long slow soaking with water. Calcium salts needed for good
soil structure will displace harmful sodium in the soil and
the water will wash the sodium down below the root zone.
Finally, as with all gardens, pests are an issue here in
Yuma as well. Mild winters and hot summers create an
ideal climate for survival of many insect, disease, and
weed species. Out of all the pests, insects are probably
the easiest to manage because there are many options for
control, both organic and conventional. Diseases and weeds
are a different story. The best way to combat diseases and
weeds is prevention. Select plants that are resistant to
diseases and practice good garden sanitation by removing
dead or dying material before the sickness spreads. Apply
preventative fungicide treatments during those occasional
wet conditions we see in the desert from rain or heavy fog
to prevent mildews from spreading, and be on the watch
for virus vectors like whitefly or alternate viral host plants.
Verticillium and fusarium wilt can be a problem in Yuma,
especially for crops such as lettuce, tomatoes, peppers, and
chiles and can really only be remedied with crop rotation.
Weeds, can be prevented with good mulching practices
or weed cloth that prevents them from establishing.
Preemergent herbicides exist, but not all of them are safe
for food production. Always read and follow pesticide
instructions and remember "the label is the law". Applying
pesticides improperly isn't only not advisable, it is illegal.
Please contact the Yuma County Cooperative Extension
office for more pest control information.
How to use this Calendar
The calendar below is intended to guide Yuma gardeners
in plant selection, timing, and cultivation. To use this
calendar find the crop you want to grow in the first column,
which is in alphabetical order. The columns to the right will
tell you what you need to know about when to plant and
harvest, seed depth, row width, and spacing between plants.
In the column labeled planting depth, some of the crops
have two numbers, for example 1 to 2 inches; planting depth
depends on soil texture, in heavy soils go with the smaller
number, in lighter soils, go with the bigger number. This
calendar has been made for seeds unless otherwise noted,
but transplants can also be planted during these times as
well. The calendar suggests planting in September for some
cool season crops. For most gardeners we suggest waiting
until October when the weather cools down. Gardeners who
provide shade and enough irrigation can start in September,
but it will take extra care to keep germinating plants alive
during the extremely warm days
References
Ten Steps to a Successful Vegetable Garden https://
extension.arizona.edu/sites/extension.arizona.edu/
files/pubs/az1435-2015.pdf
Vegetable Planting Calendar for Maricopa County https://
extension.arizona.edu/sites/extension.arizona.edu/
files/pubs/az1005-2018.pdf
Herbs
Crop (seeded unless noted) Planting Window Harvest Window Planting Depth (in) Row Width (in) Plant Spacing (in)
Basil Year round Year round 1/2 30 4
Cilantro September-December January-April 1/4 30 1-2
Dill October-February February-March 1/2 30 6
Oregano October-February December-April 1 30 4
Parsley September-January December-March 1/8 30 6
Sage November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
Savory November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
Sorrel November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
Spearmint November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
Tarragon November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
Thyme November-December March-April 1/2 30 6
3
The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension
Veggies
Crop (seeded unless noted) Planting Window Harvest Window Planting Depth (in) Row Width (in) Plant Spacing (in)
Asparagus October-February March-April 8 4 to 6 20 to 24
Artichoke September-October May-June 1 to 2 32 to 40 24
Beans (Dry) March-April June 1 30 6
Beans (Green) March-April May-June 1/2 to 1 30 3-4
Beets October-February December-April 1 30 4
Bok Choy September-January January-April 1/4 30 10
Broccoflower and Broccolini September-January January-April 1/4 36 6
Broccoli September-December December-April 1/2 36 10 to 12
Brussel Sprouts September-December January-March 1/4 to 1/2 36 18 to 20
Cabbage September-January December-March 1/8 30 10 to 12
Carrot September-December January-April 1/8 20 1-2
Cauliflower September-December December-April 3 36 10 to 12
Celery (transplant) September February-March 3 30 10
Chard September-January December-March 1/8 30 10 to 12
Corn February-March May-June 2 30 to 40 10
Cucumber September & Feb.-Mar. Nov. & May-July 1 5 to 6 6 to 10
Eggplant February-March April-June 1/2 30 to 40 10
Fennel September-November January-April 1 36 8
Garlic March-May September-November 1 to 2 12 3
Kale September-December December-April 1/4 30 6 to 10
Leek (transplants) September-November February-March 3 30 6
Lettuce (Baby Leaf) October-February October-March 1/8 12 to 14 1/2
Lettuce (Romaine, Head, Leaf) September-January December-March 1/8 18 10 to 12
Melons (Cantaloupe, Honeydew, Watermelon) February-March May-June 1 to 2 8 6 to 10
Okra February-March May-June 1 30 to 40 12 to 18
Onion (Bulb) September April 1/2 30 4
Onion (Green) September-November January-April 1/4 30 1
Peas November-December February-March 1 15 to 18 4
Peas (Black Eyed Peas) April-May July-August 2 30 4
Peanuts March-April October-November 1 to 2 40 8-10
Peppers/Chiles September & Feb.-Mar. Nov. & May-July 1/2 36 6 to 10
Potatoes November-December April-May 6 30 to 40 12
Radish September-February November-April 1/2 30 1
Spinach September-February November-April 1/8 20 3
Squash (Summer and Winter) February-March May-June 1 40 to 48 12
Tomato February-March May-July 1/4 5 10 to 12
Turnip Greens October-February January-April 1/4 30 6
4 The University of Arizona Cooperative Extension
The University of Arizona
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences
Tucson, Arizona 85721
AUTHORS
Stacey R. Bealmear
Former, Assistant Agent, Urban Horticulture
Kurt D. Nolte
Former, Yuma County Extension Director/Area Agent & Director, Yuma
Agricultural Center
REVIEWED BY
Janine Lane
Program Coordinator - Master Gardener Program
Robert Masson
Assistant Agricultural Agent
CONTACT:
Janine Lane
janinel@cals.arizona.edu
Robert Masson
masson@email.arizona.edu
This information has been reviewed
by University faculty.
extension.arizona.edu/pubs/az1615-2020.pdf
Originally published: 02/2014
Other titles from Arizona Cooperative Extension
can be found at:
extension.arizona.edu/pubs
Any products, services or organizations that are mentioned, shown or indirectly implied in this publication
do not imply endorsement by The University of Arizona.
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension work, acts of May 8 and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Jeffrey C. Silvertooth, Associate Dean & Director, Extension
& Economic Development, Division of Agriculture, Life and Veterinary Sciences, and Cooperative Extension, The University of Arizona.
The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status,
sexual orientation, gender identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.
