                                                               Backyard Gardener
                                                                                  #74

              Vegetable Crops "A to Z"

The Verde Valley has one of the best climates in the state for growing summer vegetable crops. Your garden area
should be in full sun. However, you can be successful in areas that get 6 hours of direct sun or more. Amend the soil
with copious quantities of organic matter (up to 4"), phosphorus fertilizer, and soil sulfur if you are in a limestone area.
Till these in to a depth of 8 to 12", rake smooth, irrigate, allow to settle and dry out for a few days, then plant seed or
seedlings of the summer vegetable crops you really like. Remember to irrigate and periodically apply nitrogen fertilizer.

Artichokes
Cool weather perennial thistle plants; can remain productive for 4 to 7 years. Prefer full sun and deep, fertile, well-
drained soil high in organic matter. After amending soil with compost apply phosphorus fertilizer 8 to 10 inches deep;
need consistent moisture. Plant crowns in late spring; harvest before buds open. `Imperial Star' is good for our area.

Asparagus
Best planted from seed, the University of California varieties (i.e. UC 157) are best adapted to our alkaline soils. Plant
in bottom of one-foot deep hole and backfill as they grow through the first growing season. First year - no harvest, pro-
vide lots of nitrogen to promote growth; second year harvest spears when they are the diameter of your thumb and
stop harvesting when they reach the size of a pencil. After harvest is done, fertilize and allow the remaining spears to
grow for the remainder of the growing season. Cut down and remove after frost has killed tops

Beans
Best grown from seed. Pole beans produce best and have the best flavor; plant 6 inches apart. `Kentucky Wonder' is a
tried and true variety. Bush beans are less work because they do not require trellising, but are often inferior in flavor
and production. `Contender' is one of the best varieties of bush beans.

Beets
Seeds are in capsules, soak prior to planting. There are a lot of varieties. Thin plants to every 8 inches for maximum
size.

Broccoli / Caulifower
Require lots of sun and space; light sensitive and will lean. Many good varieties, yellow cauliflower is best. Use floating
cover to protect from aphids and cabbage loopers.

Brussels Sprouts
Plant seeds and pull leaves off as it grows to form best sprouts. Interesting plant to grow.

Cabbage
Grow varieties not found in stores; needs lots of space.

Carrots
Sow seed in a large bed or wide rows, or broadcast a mixture of varieties. Thin plants to 2 to 4 inches apart. Water
stress causes splitting. Can hold in the ground in fall/winter. Many varieties available. You can also mix radish seed
into the carrot seed mix. By the time radishes are finished, the carrots should be coming on.

Chard
Plant a mix. Resists bolting better than some other greens (red especially).

                                                                               1
Vegetable Crops "A to Z"                                                                        BYG #74

Corn
Sweet corn is easy to grow but requires periodic nitrogen fertilization during the growing season. Plant in 3 to 4 row
block to ensure adequate pollination; space 1 foot apart. Many varieties available. Super sweet varieties require isola-
tion (at least 500 feet is recommended) from standard varieties to maintain quality. Plant only one variety in small gar-
den spaces. Corn borer and earworms are common pests.

Cucumbers
Best planted from seed and use less garden space if trellised or grown on a fence. All varieties are worth growing. Japa-
nese climbing varieties are superior in flavor. Keep them well irrigated as stress can make the skin bitter. Picklers have
black spines, slicers have white spines.

Dill
Dill will cross with fennel. Only need to plant once and it will continue to come up, forever.

Eggplant
Very heat tolerant. Large, European varieties (i.e. Black Beauty) can have bitter skin. These should only be harvested
when black and glossy. Japanese varieties (i.e. Ichiban) do not get bitter skin. Small, white-fruited varieties lack flavor
and are grown for ornamental purposes.

Endive
Store-bought is blanched, requires labor; nice to grow.

Garlic
Many varieties. For hardneck varieties try Music, Continental, Spanish Roja, Carpathian, Georgian Fire, or German Red.
These all produce large, easy to peel cloves and tend to be on the hot and spicy side. Some good softneck varieties are
Inchelium Red, California Early, Western Rose, Mild French, and Silver White. These are milder, produce smaller
cloves, and are most desirable for braiding. Plant in Fall (Sept); sulfur not recommended, makes garlic hotter. Harvest in
June.

Green Beans
Pole beans are more work than bush beans, but they taste much better. "Kentucky Wonder" is a good variety. If you
must plant bush beans, "Contender" is good. Plant bean seed only after soils reach 70 degrees F .

Horseradish
Can be grown here - severe irritant.

Kale
Performs best in fertile, well-drained soil rich in organic matter. Grow from seed or transplants. May be planted 2 to 3
weeks before the last frost-free date. Seeds should be planted ¼ to ¾ inch deep and thinned when plants have 3 to 4
true leaves. Side-dress with nitrogen after 4 weeks. Water deeply and infrequently to maintain even soil moisture; mois-
ture fluctuation may cause leaves to become tough and develop off flavors. Fall plantings will grow and produce through
the winter months. Being a biennial, it does not flower in the first year.

Lettuce
Leaf lettuce is easy to grow. There are some heat tolerant varieties. Head lettuce uses a lot of phosphorus. Sow seeds
shallow as they are very small. Bolting is related to day length.

Melons
Varieties are numerous, so plant varieties that are not readily available in stores. They need lots of space. Roll the vines
- done by picking up the vine and placing it back down across the crown of the plant after 2 to 4 golf-ball sized melons
have been set on that vine. We are not sure how it works, but farmers have done it for years.

                                                         2
Vegetable Crops "A to Z"                                                         BYG #74

Okra
Best grown from fresh seed. Recommended varieties: `Lee', `Emerald', and `Clemson Spineless' (all reach heights of 5
to 6 feet). Dwarf variety `Dwarf Green Long Pod' reaches a mature height of 3 feet. `Annie Oakley is a compact plant
with extra tender pods.

Onions
Plant sets if available, use short day (day neutral) onions to produce bulbs. Sweet Grano (1033Y) and Granex (1015Y)
are good sweet varieties. Avoid sulfur because it makes them hot.

Peanuts
Three classes: Virginia, Valencia and Spanish. Grow Virginia. Plant raw nut with integument intact. Flowers bloom, polli-
nate, then it forms a peg that grows into the soil where the peanut forms. Harvest after freeze and air dry. Everyone
needs to plant them at least once.

Peas
Best to grow edible pod varieties; use appropriate Rhizobium inoculum for peas.

Peppers/Chiles
Many varieties are well suited to our area. Peppers have superior ovaries and chiles have inferior ovaries (referring to
whether or not the petals are attached above (superior) or below (inferior) the ovary. Sulfur improves production in alka-
line soils. Anaheim types (Sandia, Big Jim) are roasted for green chile. Three or four jalapeño plants will produce
enough to make lots of salsa. Bell peppers need to have enough foliage to shade fruit thereby preventing sunburn. You
can get a jump on the growing season by planting them from nursery 4 or 6 packs.

Potatoes (Irish)
Buy certified seed potatoes to minimize disease; many varieties available, so grow the unusual ones. Plant in early
spring. Plant deep and backfill as they grow to maximize the amount of buried stem. If harvested during the bloom, you
get new potatoes. Otherwise, dig mature potatoes after vines die back in August or September.

Pumpkins
Need lots of space. If you have children, large field varieties are fun to grow for jack-o-lanterns. Pie and white varieties
are sweeter and tastier for baking.

Rhubarb
Perennial; prefers fertile, well-drained soil high in organic matter. Avoid excessive heat and wind. Plant cuttings taken
from healthy crowns (should have at least 1 leaf bud on top and healthy roots). Do not harvest for first 2 years. In the 3rd
year, stalks can be harvested for 3 to 4 weeks. After the 4th year, harvest stalks for 6 to 10 weeks or until plants begin to
lose vigor. Stalks are ready for harvest when the petiole is 10 to 15 inches in length. To remove, grasp the stalk just be-
low the leaf and pull upwards and to one side breaking it off rather than cutting it. This reduces the potential for disease.
Only the stalks are edible, so all leaves should be removed and discarded or composted. Leave1/3 of stalks at any giv-
en time to maintain plant health.

Spinach
Cool season crop, prefers sunny locations and fertile, well-drained soil. Good for raised beds and small spaces. Tastes
best when matures before summer heat. Seeds germinate readily after soil temperatures reach 40°F. Plant in rows 12"
apart and thin plants to 3" within each row. Irrigation: 1 to 2 inches per week, depending on temperatures. Several per-
form well in northern Arizona. Smooth-leaf spinach has flat leaves and is often sold as bagged spinach at stores. Arrow-
head has arrow-shaped leaves and is also called Asian-leaf. Savoyed-leaf spinach has recurved leaves with indented
leaf veins. `Auroch' is a smooth-leaf, F1 hybrid that is cold tolerant and suitable for harvest at both early and late growth
stages.

                          3
Vegetable Crops "A to Z"                                                  BYG #74

Squash are easy to grow, come in many varieties, and are very prolific. Summer squash are harvested when the fruit is
immature. They should be shiny and waxy to the touch. Winter squash are allowed to mature until the skin hardens and
color develops. Mature winter squash can be stored for long periods.

Sweet potatoes
Grown from "slips" or stem cuttings. Once roots form, they can be planted in the garden after the danger of frost is over.
Plant slips in rows 36 to 48 inches apart, spaced 12 inches apart within the row. Centennial is more tolerant of clay soils.

Tomatoes
Allowing to sprawl on ground will make more tomatoes but some will rot. Trellis will prevent rot but grows fewer fruits.
Fruit set diminishes above 90 degrees F. Tomatoes self-pollinate so seed saving is easy on non-hybrid varieties. Blos-
som-set product works at low temperatures (55 to 85 degrees F). Bees "sonicate" (vibration of wings w/o flight) which
releases pollen.

Watermelon - See Melons

Zucchini - See Squash

Additional Resources
Yavapai County Vegetable Planting Dates
Dates show are for seed planting in the ground, unless otherwise noted.
Yavapai County Selecting Tomato Varieties
Yavapai County Tomato Planting, Growing, Harvesting
Yavapai County Challenges with Growing Tomatoes
Ten Steps to a Successful Vegetable Garden, University of Arizona
"Sweet Potatoes the Garden", Utah State University Cooperative Extension

February 11, 2024

   Adapted from original Backyard Gardener publications by Jeff Schalau, Agent, Agriculture & Natural Resources,
                                     University of Arizona Cooperative Extension, Yavapai County

 The University of Arizona is an equal opportunity, affirmative action institution. The University does not discriminate
   on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender
                                      identity, or genetic information in its programs and activities.

                                                                              4
